---
eip: 2780
title: Reduce intrinsic transaction gas
author: Matt Garnett (@lightclient), Uri Klarman (@uriklarman)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-2780-reduce-intrinsic-cost-of-transactions/4413
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2020-07-11
---

## Abstract
Reduce the intrinsic cost of a transaction from `21,000` to `7,000` gas.

## Motivation
The current `21,000` gas intrinsic cost of a transaction makes sending ETH very costly, often times prohibitively costly for small amounts (tens of USD).
While broad changes to the gas price and first price auction are being considerted in other EIPs (like EIP-1559),
substantialy reducing the cost of sending ETH and enabling higher volumes of such transactions would be a net positive if done in a safe manner,
and without imposing negative externalities, as outlined below.


## Specification
After `block.number >= FORK_BLOCK`, enforce an intrinsic gas cost of `7,000`.

## Rationale

The proliferation of calls to DeFi smart-contracts had substantially increased the cost of making transactions,
since such calls are usually both time sensitive and involve large sums of money.
While the utilization of the chain's capacity by the most valuable transactions is by design,
the high cost of sending transactions is limiting Ethereum's the use-cases,
create a terribel user experience,
decreases the actual value created (and captured) by ETH,
and pushes users to seek alternatives in other, less-congested chains.


Note on Layer-2: It is true that the high cost might push users to try using L2 solutions,
however forcing users to utilize L2 by allowing the UX of using L1 to deteriorate is a losing strategy (see BTC / Lightning),
and the safety of many L2 solutions hinges on the ability to use L1 if needed.
If L2 are to gain significant traction they must achieve it by providing superior properties (e.g., finality, cost, UX),
not by imposing artificial restrictions to encourage it. 


Reducing the intrinsic cost of a transaction from `21,000` to `7,000` gas will make sending transactions cheaper,
is easily achievable, and does not incur technical debt.
However, such a change should only be made after it is determined that it does not impose non-negligble externalities, specifically:

* Increases uncle-rate.

* Increases the pace at which the state-size of Ethereum grows.

* Enhance gas-manipulation technices (gas-token).


## Backwards Compatibility
This EIP is backward compatible as well as compatible with other approaches pursued in other EIPs.

## Test Cases
TBD

## Implementation
TBD

## Security Considerations

While the benefits of reducing transactions' intrinsic cost are appearant,
such a change should be applied if it impose no negative externalities,
or if such effects are negligible.


#### Increased Uncle Rate

Historically, periods of high transaction counts has correlated with
higher-than-average uncle blocks being mined. It must be determined that the
new intrinsic cost `7,000` will not adversely affect uncle rate.

  
#### Increased State Size Growth

The growth of Ethereum's state size continues to raise concerns among members of the commu grow at an unsustainable pace.
 Increased the transaction throughput will exasperate this problem.


#### Enhancing Gas-Manipulation (gas-token)



#### Storage may be accessed more than once
It is difficult to arrive at a fixed-cost for the intrinsic transaction fee,
because it's possible for clients to need to revalidate a transaction in its
mempool. This can be caused artificially by submitting a chain of transactions
and bumping the gas price of the first transaction by minimal step sizes. Since
the first transaction is now a "new" transaction, the transactions that follow
sequentially will need to ensure the account's balance can still afford to
transact.

## Copyright
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
